Spirituality is the broad concept of a belief in something beyond the self. It may involve religious traditions centering on the belief in a higher power, but it can also involve a holistic belief in an individual connection to others and to the world as a whole.


Spirituality offers a worldview that suggests there is more to life than just what people experience on a sensory and physical level.
Instead, it suggests that there is something greater that connects all beings to each other and to the universe itself. It also proposes that there is ongoing existence after death and strives to answer questions about the meaning of life, how people are connected to each other, truths about the universe, and other mysteries of human existence.

Spirituality and religious activity have been a source of comfort and relief from stress for multitudes of people. While people use many different religions and paths to find God or to express their spirituality, research has shown that those who are more religious or spiritual and use their spirituality to cope with challenges in life experience many benefits to their health and well-being.
﻿﻿

Signs of Spirituality
Spirituality is not a single path or belief system. There are many ways to experience spirituality and the benefits of a spiritual experience. For some people, this might involve the belief in a higher power or a specific religious practice.


For others, it may involve experiencing a sense of connection to a higher state or a sense of inter-connectedness with the rest of humanity and nature. Some signs of spirituality can include:






		Asking deep questions about topics such as suffering and what happens after death
		Deepening connections with other people
		Experiencing compassion and empathy for others
		Experiencing feelings of interconnectedness
		Feelings of awe and wonder
		Seeking happiness beyond material possessions or other external rewards
		Seeking meaning and purpose
		Wanting to make the world a better place


Not everyone experiences or expresses spirituality in the same way. Some people may seek spiritual experiences in every aspect of their lives, while others may be more likely to have these feelings under specific conditions or in certain locations. For example, some people may be more likely to have spiritual experiences in churches or other religious temples, while some might have these feelings when they out enjoying nature.


Types of Spirituality
There are many different types of spirituality, ranging from religious traditions to more secular approaches. Some of the major forms of spirituality include:


		Buddhism
		Christianity
		Hinduism
		Humanism
		Islam
		Judaism
		New age spirituality
		Sikhism


It is important to remember that there are many other spiritual traditions that exist throughout the world, including traditional African and Indigenous spiritual practices. Such spiritual practices can be particularly important to groups of people who have been subjected to the effects of colonialism.
Uses
There are a number of different reasons why people may turn to spirituality, including but not limited to:

		To find purpose and meaning: Exploring spirituality can help people find answers to questions they have about philosophical questions such as "what is the meaning of life?" and "what purpose does my life serve?"
		To cope with feelings of stress, depression, and anxiety: Spiritual experiences can be helpful when coping with the stresses of life. 
		To restore hope and optimism: Spirituality can help people develop a more hopeful outlook on life.
		To find a sense of community and support: Because spiritual traditions often involve organized religions or groups, becoming a part of such a group can serve as an important source of social support.

Impact of Spirituality
While specific spiritual views are a matter of faith, research has demonstrated some of the benefits of spirituality and spiritual activity. The results may surprise no one who has found comfort in their religious or spiritual views, but they are definitely noteworthy in that they demonstrate in a scientific way that these activities do have benefits for many people.

The following are a few more of the many positive findings related to spirituality and its influence on physical and mental health:

		Research has shown that religion and spirituality can help people cope with the effects of everyday stress. One study found that everyday spiritual experiences helped older adults better cope with negative feelings and enhanced positive feelings.
		Research shows that older women are more grateful to God than older men, and they receive greater stress-buffering health effects due to this gratitude.3﻿
		According to research, those with an intrinsic religious orientation, regardless of gender, exhibited less physiological reactivity toward stress than those with an extrinsic religious orientation.4﻿ Those who were intrinsically oriented dedicated their lives to God or a "higher power," while the extrinsically oriented ones used religion for external ends like making friends or increasing community social standing.

This, along with other research, demonstrates that there may be tangible and lasting benefits to maintaining involvement with a spiritual community. This involvement, along with the gratitude that can accompany spirituality, can be a buffer against stress and is linked to greater levels of physical health.

Dedication to God or a "higher power" translated into less stress reactivity, greater feelings of well-being, and ultimately even a decreased fear of death.
People who feel comfortable and comforted using spirituality as a coping mechanism for stress can rest assured that there's even more evidence that this is a good idea for them. Prayer works for young and old alike. Prayer and spirituality have been linked to:

		Better health
		Greater psychological well-being
		Less depression5﻿
		Less hypertension
		Less stress, even during difficult times6﻿
		More positive feelings
		Superior ability to handle stress

Tips
Whether you are rediscovering a forgotten spiritual path, reinforcing your commitment to an already well-established one, or seeking a new source of spiritual fulfillment, exploring your spiritual side may help improve your well-being.

Spirituality is a very personal experience, and everyone’s spiritual path may be unique. Research shows, however, that some spiritual stress relief strategies have been helpful to many, regardless of faith.7﻿﻿ Some things you can do to start exploring spirituality include:

		Pay attention to how you are feeling: Part of embracing spirituality means also embracing what it means to be human, both the good and the bad. 
		Focus on others: Opening your heart, feeling empathy, and helping others are important aspects of spirituality.
		Meditate: Try spending 10 to 15 minutes each morning engaged in some form of meditation.
		Practice gratitude: Start a gratitude journal and record what you are grateful for each day. This can be a great reminder of what is most important to you and what brings you the greatest happiness.
		Try mindfulness: By becoming more mindful, you can become more aware and appreciative of the present. Mindfulness encourages you to be less judgmental (both of yourself and others) and focus more on the present moment rather than dwelling on the past or future.
Visualization meditation is a powerful way to use the mind to influence the body and can also be an empowering way to manifest desired outcomes in your life. Deepak Chopra teaches that what we place our attention on grows stronger and what we take our attention away from will begin to diminish. The unconscious mind is extremely powerful and it works very well with imagery.
One common visualization practice is centered around health. By visualizing your body-mind as being healthy, vibrant, and energized—or grounded, peaceful, and calm—you can begin to elicit these things both mentally and physically. Another approach is using visual imagery for creative purposes. By constructing an image in your mind of what your life might look like after having accomplished a goal and really seeing yourself having already achieved it is a way to begin living in ways that support the manifestation of your desired outcome.
To meditate using visual imagery, practice the following:
	1	Identify your desired outcome. For example, do you wish to feel more grounded and at peace in your mind and emotions? Or would you like to envision your physical body as being healthy, vibrant, and strong? Or are you longing to create art, write poetry, be in a new relationship, or travel abroad?
	2	Create an internal representation of what this looks, sounds, and feels like. Make it as real and as compelling as possible.
	3	Enter into a meditative state by relaxing and taking some deep breaths and then bring the image into your awareness. Associate yourself into the picture by stepping inside it and feeling as if it has already happened.
	4	When it's time to come out of meditation, simply allow the image to fade off into the distance and relinquish any attachment to the outcome.
	5	Meditate in this fashion anywhere from 10 to 15 minutes each day.
Japa or Mantra-Based Meditation
Japa meditation is a mantra-based meditation path that is one of the oldest, most revered classical techniques known today. The word “mantra” translates to mind vehicle or mind instrument. Japa meditation has the practitioner repeating a word or phrase for the duration of the meditation, with the mantra being the focal point throughout.
During the practice, whenever you drift away from the mantra to other thoughts, sounds, or physical sensations, you simply guide your focus back to the repetition of the mantra. Think of it as a dance back and forth between mantra and thought. Some mantras have a specific meaning and it’s said that by repeating the mantra, you are connecting to the energetic essence of its intention.
Other mantras purposely have no meaning and are designed to help access deeper levels of silence. In this approach, eventually, the mantra and thoughts will cancel one another out. When this happens, your conscious awareness transcends the busyness of the mind and reaches higher states of consciousness.
Popular styles of mantra-based meditation are Primordial Sound Meditation as taught by Deepak Chopra and the age-old practice of the So Hum meditation. Both of these practices are easily learned in person or online for your convenience.
Loving-Kindness or Metta Meditation
Metta meditation, also known as Loving-Kindness meditation, is designed to cultivate four qualities of love: friendliness (Metta), compassion (Karuna), appreciative joy (Mudita), and equanimity (Upekkha). The quality of Metta, or friendliness, is expressed as genuine compassion sent out with the intention of surrounding ourselves and others with loving-kindness. With all that is going on in the world today, Metta meditation is a worthwhile practice for each of us to spend some time in each day. This style of meditation also works well as an entrance point for the practice of forgiveness and can be a powerful tool for lessening the charge of negative emotions we have toward those who have wronged us.
While there are various approaches to Metta meditation, this audio clip on Loving Kindness Meditation is a thorough and well-spoken version.
Another variation will have you think silently to yourself, “May I be filled with loving-kindness. May I be well. May I be peaceful and at ease. May I be truly happy.” You would then bring someone else into your mind (someone you love and/or someone who you are feeling challenged by) and say silently, "May you be filled with loving-kindness. May you be well. May you be peaceful and at ease. May you be truly happy.” You may then bring all of humanity into your awareness and send the same intention out to the collective—to all sentient beings, “May we be filled with loving-kindness. May we be well. May we be peaceful and at ease. May we be truly happy.”
Once you have done this meditation a few times and you remember the process, you can begin to do the meditation on your own without listening to the audio file. Choose whatever language you prefer to use and practice this meditation for a period of time to see how it resonates with you.
Breath-Awareness Meditation
Breath-awareness meditation is a simple practice of finding a comfortable seat, closing your eyes, and placing your attention in the inhalation and exhalation of your breath. Breath awareness is an effective way to establish a greater mind-body connection and to reduce stress. This form of meditation can be your preferred meditation practice each day and it is also a highly useful way to calm you down during any moment of tension in the workplace and at home.
Once you’ve tried a few different types of meditation, you will have a better idea of what resonates with you and what doesn't. The most important thing to remember is that there is no right or wrong meditation; there are many paths that all lead to the same destination, and the beauty of life is that we get to choose our own path.
Keep it simple at the beginning and just feel out some different techniques. When you find a routine that you enjoy, the next step is to set aside 15 to 20 minutes each day to cultivate your meditative practice. From there, tend to your practice each day and you will experience a number of life-changing benefits to your health and well-being.
On a surface level, the mental body is your thoughts. On a deeper level, it is the domain of your beliefs, desires, values, and goals. Beliefs are opinions and convictions that we hold as being true without having immediate proof. Values represent what we hold internally as most important in an area of life. Values and beliefs can come from thoughts that were formed very early in childhood.
We all have desires to achieve or acquire something in our lives, which is why we set goals and intentions to help us get where we want to go. Some surface-level thoughts, which may create goals or desires, direct our mental focus from moment to moment. This is how our logical, linear minds learn and operate, and it is one of the aspects of ourselves that is most familiar to us.
As energy flows down from the mental body into the emotional body, it can bump into stored baggage from the past and create some turbulence. Stored baggage can come from past fears, which can project into the future and cause anxiety. Or, it can come from experiencing a lot of anger or resentment toward someone, which can cause anger or resentment later in life when familiar conditions repeat. You may even develop negative beliefs about people.
Practices for the Mental Body:

	•	Set goals
	•	Get a coach or mentor to keep you focused on your goals
	•	Daily Recapitulation
	•	Continue your education (e.g., read books or take classes)
	•	Eliminate stressors from your life
We found four relevant publications, including two reviews on the effects of yoga on depression , a description of studies on yogic breathing  for depression, and one “summary” . The reviewing authors have reported that the studies reviewed showed a large variety of diagnoses ranging from “major depression or some other type of diagnosed depression” to “elevated depressive symptoms” . Although several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) reported beneficial effects of yoga interventions for treating depressive symptoms, the quality and quantity of the data from these studies appear insufficient to conclude whether there is substantial clinical justification to consider yoga as a treatment of depression. Compared to passive controls, the yoga interventions seem to be effective; when compared with active controls, not surprisingly, the effects are less conclusive . The study results are so far not sufficient in quantity and quality to determine whether studies with a focus on the asanas are more effective as compared to studies with meditation-focussed or pranayama-focussed styles. Thus, there is a strong need to conduct more conclusive studies with high methodological quality and larger patient samples. Whether motivation of depressed patients could be a problem or not remains to be clarified. There has been an attempt to explore mechanisms of action and to understand the complete picture of the effects of yoga in depression looking at electrophysiological markers of attention, and neurotransmitters which were found to change with yoga [7, 31].
The six branches are:
	•	Hatha yoga: This is the physical and mental branch designed to prime the body and mind.
	•	Raja yoga: This branch involves meditation and strict adherence to a series of disciplinary steps known as the “eight limbs” of yoga.
	•	Karma yoga: This is a path of service that aims to create a future free from negativity and selfishness.
	•	Bhakti yoga: This aims to establish the path of devotion, a positive way to channel emotions and cultivate acceptance and tolerance.
	•	Jnana yoga: This branch of yoga is about wisdom, the path of the scholar, and developing the intellect through study.
	•	Tantra yoga: This is the pathway of ritual, ceremony, or consummation of a relationship.
Yoga maintains that chakras are center points of energy, thoughts, feelings, and the physical body. According to yogic teachers, chakras determine the way people experience reality through emotional reactions, desires or aversions, levels of confidence or fear, and even physical symptoms and effects.
When energy becomes blocked in a chakra, it is said to trigger physical, mental, or emotional imbalances that manifest in symptoms, such as anxiety, lethargy, or poor digestion.
Asanas are the many physical positions in Hatha yoga. People who practice yoga use asanas to free energy and stimulate an imbalanced chakra.
Ashtanga yoga: This type of yoga uses ancient yoga teachings. However, it became popular during the 1970s. Ashtanga applies six established sequences of postures that rapidly link every movement to breath.
Bikram yoga: Also known as “hot” yoga, Bikram occurs in artificially heated rooms at temperatures of nearly 105 degrees and 40 percent humidity. It consists of 26 poses and a sequence of two breathing exercises.
Hatha yoga: This is a generic term for any type of yoga that teaches physical postures. “Hatha” classes usually serve as a gentle introduction to the basic yoga postures.
Iyengar yoga: This type focuses on finding the correct alignment in each pose using a range of props, such as blocks, blankets, straps, chairs, and bolsters.
Jivamukti yoga: Jivamukti means “liberation while living.” This type emerged in 1984 and incorporates spiritual teachings and practices that focus on the fast-paced flow between poses rather than the poses themselves.
This focus is called vinyasa. Each class has a theme, which is explored through yoga scripture, chanting, meditation, asana, pranayama, and music. Jivamukti yoga can be physically intense.
Kripalu yoga: This type teaches practitioners to know, accept, and learn from the body. A student of Kripalu learns to find their own level of practice by looking inward. The classes usually begin with breathing exercises and gentle stretches, followed by a series of individual poses and final relaxation.
Kundalini yoga: Kundalini means “coiled, like a snake.” Kundalini yoga is a system of meditation that aims to release pent-up energy.
A class typically begins with chanting and ends with singing. In between, it features asana, pranayama, and meditation customized to create a specific outcome.
Power yoga: In the late 1980s, practitioners developed this active and athletic type of yoga, based on the traditional ashtanga system.
Sivananda: This is a system based on a five-point philosophy. This philosophy maintains that proper breathing, relaxation, diet, exercise, and positive thinking work together to form a healthy yogic lifestyle. Typically uses the same 12 basic asanas, bookended by sun salutations and savasana poses.
Viniyoga: Viniyoga can adapt to any person, regardless of physical ability. Viniyoga teachers require in-depth training and tend to be experts on anatomy and yoga therapy.
Yin: This is a quiet, meditative yoga practice, also called taoist yoga. Yin yoga allows the release of tension in key joints, including:
	•	the ankles
	•	knees
	•	· hips
	•	the whole back
	•	neck
	•	shoulders
Yin poses are passive, meaning that gravity shoulders most of the force and effort.
Prenatal yoga: Prenatal yoga uses postures that practitioners have designed for people who are pregnant. It can support people in getting back into shape after pregnancy as well as supporting health iduring pregnancy.
Restorative yoga: This is a relaxing method of yoga. A person spends a restorative yoga class in four or five simple poses, using props like blankets and bolsters to sink into deep relaxation without exerting any effort in holding the pose.
Studies suggest a positive association of spirituality and health behaviors with well-being (especially subjective well-being), but still the precise character of such relationships between all these constructs remains unknown. The present study aims to explore the relations between spirituality, health-related behaviors, and psychological well-being in the context of acquired education. A questionnaire survey was conducted among 595 students from six different universities, whose study programs either focused on the human body or the human mind and spirit. Path analysis and linear regression were used to model the relationship between the examined constructs. The results show that both spirituality and health-related behaviors are positively related to psychological well-being, and that the relationship with spirituality is also mediated by health-related behaviors. Only spirituality is associated with the type of acquired education, especially in the group of students whose studies focus on the human mind and spirit. Moreover, spirituality in this group seems to display a stronger relationship with psychological well-being. These findings may contribute to the better understanding of some significant determinants of psychological well-being. They carry important implications for the faculty members responsible for curriculum preparation to account for teaching contents related to the conduct of a healthy lifestyle and to spiritual development.


Introduction
Almost 20 years ago, following the commencement of the positive psychology movement, the research approach in the areas of psychology, especially those concerning mental health, began to change, concentrating on a much greater interest in well-being than on mere diseases or disorders (Bhullar et al., 2014). Two main directions have emerged in well-being research: one based on a hedonistic approach and the other on eudaimonia. According to the hedonistic approach, well-being is concerned with affective pleasure in someone’s life (Watson et al., 1988). The term subjective well-being (SWB) is used in positive psychology in the sense of a high level of positive affect, a low level of negative affect, and a high degree of satisfaction with one’s life (Deci and Ryan, 2008). In contrast, in the eudaemonist approach, well-being is perceived as the degree to which people function so that they could realize their full potential (Waterman, 1993). In publications on positive psychology eudaimonism is often synonymous with psychological well-being (PWB; Ryan and Deci, 2001).

Recently, the main direction in studies of determinants of well-being has focused on subjective well-being (Diener, 2000). Demographic determinants (Argyle, 1999), cognitive and motivational determinants (Lyubomirsky, 2001), and personality determinants (Park, et al., 2004) of subjective well-being have been identified. Less attention is currently paid to psychological well-being, however, some research indicated religion and spirituality to be significant PWB implications (Levin and Chatters, 1998; Lawler-Row and Elliott, 2009) and revealed associations between pro-health behaviors, spirituality, and well-being (Boswell et al., 2006). At present, in a holistic view of health beyond biological and psychosocial well-being, the spiritual dimension of well-being is frequently discussed. This new construct is defined as a sense of connection with others, sense of life, and relationship with a transcendent force. It has psychosocial and religious components, and it is believed to promote spiritual health (Ghaderi et al., 2018; Alborzi et al., 2019). The present study attempts to gain a better insight into relationships between spirituality, health-related behavior, and psychological well-being with regard to the type of acquired education.

Theoretical Background
Psychological Well-Being
The answer to the question “What does it mean to feel well psychologically?” needs to be sought in literature on humanistic psychology, including developmental and health psychology (Ryff, 1989). Ryff created a multidimensional construct of well-being, building on such concepts as basic life tendencies of Buhler (1935), psychosocial stages of Erikson (1959), personality changes of Neugarten (1973), positive criteria of mental health of Jahoda (1958), account of individuation of Jung (1933), formulation of maturity of Allport (1961), depiction of the fully-functioning person of Rogers (1961), and notion of self-actualization of Maslow (1968).
Psychological well-being covers a wide range of welfare including positive assessments of oneself and one’s past life (Self-Acceptance), a sense of continued growth and development as a person (Personal Growth), the belief that one’s life is purposeful and meaningful (Purpose in Life), the possession of quality relations with others (Positive Relations With Others), the capacity to manage effectively one’s life and the surrounding world (Environmental Mastery), and a sense of self-determination (Autonomy; Ryff and Keyes, 1995, p. 720). Ryff and Singer (1998) also developed a measure to assess the above six distinct factors of positive psychological functioning.
Both the model and the measure came under review. The former was criticized for the lack of independence of individual scales (Springer and Hausner, 2006). According to various researchers, Personal Growth, Purpose in Life, Self-Acceptance, and Environmental Mastery do form a single scale. The latter was criticized for its lack of factorial validity or internal consistency (van Dierendonck, 2004). However, some other studies supported the six-factor PWB model (Ryff and Singer, 2006; van Dierendonck et al., 2008) and also revealed the existence of a single higher-order PWB factor above the subscales (Keyes et al., 2002).
The concept of PWB corresponds to the WHO definition of health as a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, formulated in 1948 (WHO, 1948). A high level of PWB is associated with a lower risk of depression (Ryff and Keyes, 1995; Fava, 1999), a lower possibility of displaying risk behavior (Yonker et al., 2012), and a decreased immune cell expression of a conserved transcriptional response to adversity (CTRA; Fredrickson et al., 2015).
Spirituality
According to Joseph et al. (2017, p. 506), spirituality should be understood as “a more general, unstructured, personalized, and naturally occurring phenomenon, where a person seeks closeness and/or connectedness between him/herself and a higher power or purpose.” Other authors define spirituality in terms of search for universal truth and as an activity enabling people to discover meaning and significance in the surrounding world (Woods and Ironson, 1999). Spirituality can also be perceived as a dynamic reality, constantly exploring something new; it may also involve the learning of the ultimate boundaries of existence and seeking a broader meaning of life. Hart (1994, p. 23) defined spirituality as a way in which an individual experiences his or her faith in everyday life and style “in which the individual refers to the final conditions of individual existence.”
Spirituality therefore forms a multidimensional theoretical construct. In essence, it constitutes transcendence understood as going beyond or above “the real I.” In this context, spirituality is defined as experiencing transcendence through inner peace, harmony, or connectedness to others (Boswell et al., 2006). Transcendence can take place both within the person (self-realization, self-improvement, and personal development) and outside the person. “External” transcendence may be directed to a higher entity or energy; to another person, claimed to be of particular value, whose good is more important than one’s own good; or to the universe (Heszen-Niejodek and Gruszyńska, 2004). Spirituality differs from religion as the latter is rather linked with specific rituals, institutional dependencies, and social relationships, whereas the former is more about personal experience of what is unseen and recognized as greater than ourselves (Tovar-Murray, 2011). Thoresen (1998) claims that religion is perceived mainly as a social phenomenon, while spirituality is usually considered at the individual level and within a specific context. Despite their common transcendence-related roots, spirituality and religiosity may not be treated interchangeably. These are different areas, however, overlapping in their meaning (Krok, 2009a).
Heszen-Niejodek and Gruszyńska (2004) understand transcendence as a common denominator for many concepts of spirituality. The two-way understanding of transcendence, described above as self-improvement and as a turn toward a higher-being, makes it possible to examine the phenomenon of spirituality using the methodology of psychological sciences, without questioning theological and philosophical perspectives (Krok, 2009a).
Studies demonstrated the positive impact of spirituality on physical health and mental health as well as on other positive health outcomes such as subjective well-being, health-related quality of life, coping skills, recovering from mental illness, or less addictive or suicidal behaviors (Mueller et al., 2001; Miller and Thoresen, 2003; Kharitonov, 2012; Unterrainer et al., 2014). However, we must bear in mind that spirituality is a complex construct and as such it is defined in multiple ways and measured with different tools (Lun and Bond, 2013).
In our study, we used the Self-Reported Questionnaire by Heszen-Niejodek and Gruszyńska (2004), in which the overall factor Spirituality consists of Religious Attitudes (religious experiences, their importance in everyday life, their influence on moral choices and behavior, and relationship to God); Ethical Sensitivity (high place of ethical values in the hierarchy of values, our compliance with them, and tendency toward ethical reflection); and Harmony (seeking harmony with the world, internal consistency, and cohesion of various forms of one’s own activity). These dimensions reflect the main manifestations of spirituality available in internal experience, distinguished on the basis of descriptions of specific manifestations of spirituality in psychological literature (Hill et al., 2000; Socha, 2000; Thoresen and Harris, 2002), subsequently ordered according to the aforementioned directions of transcendence (me, God, other people, and the world).
Health-Related Behavior
Lifestyle and lifestyle-related health behaviors are some of the determinants of health potential (Binkowska-Bury et al., 2010). A health behavior is any activity undertaken to prevent or detect disease or to improve health and well-being (Conner and Norman, 1996). In studies on health behavior and behavioral change, health behaviors are usually divided into those associated with physical activity, diet, and the use of psychoactive substances (Norman et al., 2008). However, there are currently other more popular approaches that consider multiple lifestyle-forming health behaviors, between which different interactions take place (op. cit).
The present study uses an approach that distinguishes four categories of health-related behaviors: (a) proper nutrition habits (eating proper food and keeping a well-balanced diet); (b) prophylaxis (obeying health recommendations and obtaining health and disease information); (c) positive attitude (avoiding emotional overload, stress, or depressing situations); and (d) pro-health practices (good sleeping habits, relaxation, and physical activity; Juczyński, 2009).
The positive impact of health-related behavior on subjective well-being has already been the subject of studies on various age groups: adolescents (Shaffer-Hudkins, 2011; Sacker, 2012), university students (Binkowska-Bury et al., 2010), and older adults (Boswell et al., 2006). However, little is still known about the precise relationship between health-related behavior and psychological well-being. Moreover, there have been very few studies regarding the impact of spirituality on health-related behavior, although the former was recognized as one of four dimensions of health (Harris et al., 1999).

Present Study
The main aim of this study was to examine the relationship between spirituality, health-related behavior, type of acquired education, and psychological well-being. To achieve this goal, a path analysis was conducted. It is considered one of a few possible statistical approaches addressing the problem of spirituality and health, recommended by Miller and Thoresen (2003). The path model helps to verify assumed relationships between a set of variables represented as a structure of the tested model, which is based on theoretical associations between the variables. It also provides a framework for the analysis of the direct, indirect, and total effects, whose form provides an analytical basis for interpreting moderation effects (Alwin and Hausner, 1975; Miller and Thoresen, 2003). Direct effects are regression coefficients representing the structural components of the model; indirect effects are parts of causal influence transmitted by intervening moderator and mediator variables; and total effects are the totals of direct and indirect effects (Alwin and Hausner, 1975; Pearl, 2012). It must be highlighted that although path analysis implies causality, it cannot be inferred from the gathered data since it is cross-sectional (Bollen and Pearl, 2013). The directions of the relations in the model were based on the mentioned literature, yet the model itself was not aimed at testing causal effects. The path analysis was used to disaggregate, quantify, and compare the magnitude of associations between the variables (Miller and Thoresen, 2003; Bollen and Pearl, 2013). 
The impact of spirituality on recovery from disease and the promotion of health is a topic that has received the attention of many researchers and scholars around the world. Spirituality is considered one of the natural capacities of humans that has positive effects on individuals’ health. The aim of this study was to review the impact of spirituality on people’s health and to discuss the relationship between health and belief in spiritual powers.
Evidence Acquisition: This study comprised a non-systematic narrative review of original and reliable scientific articles on spirituality published from 1972 to 2014. The research strategy was carried out using electronic databases such as Scopus, PubMed, and Google Scholar. Considering the goal of the research, 51 articles were selected and reviewed.
Results: Most studies indicated the positive impact of spirituality on people’s health. Recourse to spiritual powers leads to reductions in anxiety and concern among patients and their families, and allows people to more easily accept and cope with their health disorders.
Conclusions: To date, most of the studies conducted on the topic have confirmed the positive impact of religious beliefs and other spiritual approaches on health and the course of recovery from acute and chronic diseases. Based on these findings, medical personnel should turn their attention to the advantages of spirituality in relation to patients’ treatment and acquaint patients and their families with such spiritual benefits. 
Spirituality places far greater emphasis on human principles than religious practices, and indicates a person’s feelings about the meaning and goals of life beyond material values . Spirituality encompasses a series of meanings that underline aspiration, compatibility, vision, beliefs, and the meaningfulness of conditions . It is an inextricable element of human life and an important factor that enables humans to overcome numerous challenges. When considering spirituality, a different definition of health is given with respect to independent human identity. Traditionally, health represents humans’ biologic identity based on modern medical science and the principle definitions of health ; however, another identity is humans’ psychological or sympathetic perceptions, which constitute community health.
During the 19th and first half of the 20th century, diseases were described as disorders in the body’s physiologic processes, a definition that remains dominant in medicine. In the second half of the 20th century, the indirect impact of physical and mental interaction on health status was officially recognized. Attention then turned to the question of why some individuals become ill frequently and have delayed recoveries. Presently, people are again considering that there is a relationship between spirituality and health. Religious beliefs and spirituality are deemed beneficial to the maintenance of physical and psychological health, a reality which, once more, revives the idea of the integration of the body and the psyche. Notwithstanding, the trend in medical science is inclined toward the dominant perspectives of religious outlook, which are free of extravagance and prejudice . All divine religions, particularly Islam, place special emphasis on the non-material aspects of life and draw attention to the spiritual life of mankind. Due to this capacity, Islam, as well as other monotheistic religions, play a key role in helping people cope with disease .
As Imam Ali (May God’s greetings be upon him) stated 14 centuries ago, “Be aware that poverty is the greatest of all evils, and physical ill health is more severe than destitution, and worse still is illness of the heart, and remember that the greatest blessing is piety of the heart, followed by, in order of importance, bodily health and financial security.” Herein, sin and transgression are mentioned with respect to the ailing soul and heart . In addition, Imam Ali urged people to avoid scourges, hardships, and difficulties through prayer, a means that emphasizes the impact of prayer and praise to God on physical and psychological health .
Imam Sadegh (May God’s greetings be upon him) said, “If any one of you gets caught up in one of the worldly sorrows, it isn’t difficult if he/she, after having prayer’s ablution (vozou) goes to the mosque, prays, and asks God to remove his/her sadness. Have you not heard that God has said, ‘Seek help from patience and praying’”.
Nowadays, many studies regarding the connection between spirituality and health are in progress. Naturally, the topics discussed in this context comprise a series of criteria such as mortality, the eventual benchmark of health, living efficiency, and treatment. Additionally, it is thought that the different aspects of religion, as with most prominent aspects of spirituality, could have a positive impact on health . Thus, religious practices and acts of worship, especially at special times and in particular places, could lead to the regulation of the body’s important physiological reactions . Experimental results have largely been compatible with the perspective that, through different mechanisms, religion is an important factor in preventing many diseases and the promotion of health . Gallup’s opinion poll conducted in 1998 indicated that 60% of Americans reported religion to be of the utmost importance in their lives, and over 82% believed that they needed spiritual improvement, the survey thus confirming people’s considerable concern with spirituality . Such observations and results have redoubled the need to pay attention to the effect of religious beliefs on the psychological and physical health of people and their impact on trends of compliance, recovery, and the treatment of disease. The present study explores the latest findings on the impact of spirituality on physical and psychological health.
Religious coping is the most common reaction to health problems and disorders . Patients who are spiritual may use their beliefs to cope with disease, pain, and stressful situations. Patients with spiritual vision have a more positive perspective on life and report a better quality of life  and well-being . One of the best examples of compliance with disease is based on evidence obtained from patients with different types of cancer . In such cases, patients cope more easily with their disease, are happier and more satisfied with their lives, and feel less pain  due to their spiritual beliefs and religious outlooks. Other evidence has shown that spirituality plays an important role in quality of health, especially among the elderly and those afflicted with non-communicable diseases .
Studies have confirmed a connection between a spiritual lifestyle and people’s capacity to enjoy life, even when associated with symptoms of pain . The results of the distribution of pain questionnaire obtained from hospitalized patients in the United States showed that personal prayers are the most common non-medication approach to controlling pain . Prayer is therefore worth considering as a way to cope with pain.
Having a spiritual vision can help patients comply with disease and confront death. In one study, 93% of 108 patients suffering from cancer cited their religious beliefs as a strategy for coping with cancer . In another study, 26.1% of the subjects with cancer, chronic pain, and heart disease stated that religious practice helped them deal with their illnesses . Notably, a relatively high proportion of these patients comprised those afflicted with cancer. In terms of Alzheimer’s disease, praying is the most important spiritual training used to tackle the disease . Additionally, among patients and their families prayer is a strategy for managing cancer pain . Studies of parents who had lost children to cancer confirmed the positive impact of spirituality on stress reduction and compliance with their conditions after the death of their children . Saying prayers also helps alleviate anxiety and concern in mothers of children suffering from cancer . This effect was confirmed by meditation groups as well as written statements from patients. The positive impact of yoga and spirituality on the relationship between the body and the psyche and the role played by psychology (mind) in the Indian community have been reported ; however, there were some ambiguities concerning the efficiency of the study.
 Recovery
Recovery and convalescence following surgical operations are accelerated by spiritual commitments. Spirituality has been referred to as a positive and complementary approach to physical activity and treatment by physicians . Saying prayers as a practical manifestation of spirituality is effective in the treatment of many acute and chronic diseases . For example, heart transplant patients who participated in religious activities stated that their beliefs played an important role in their improved compliance with treatment, and they also exhibited higher levels of self-confidence, less anxiety and apprehension, and an improvement in physical performance over a period of 12 months . Similarly, people with spiritual vision have shown lower levels of depression, despair, and cognitive disorders, with positive recovery trends. By and large, people with less apprehension are healthier, and it seems likely that spirituality enables people to enjoy better health and to live better lives with less depression .
 Advantages of Familiarity With Patients’ Spiritual Vision
Familiarity with the spiritual aspects of patients is beneficial to both patients and physicians. From most patients’ perspectives, a discussion with their physician about their beliefs is very beneficial; however, in practice, few physicians have such conversations with their patients. According to a study conducted at a lung hospital in Pennsylvania, 66% of patients indicated that their confidence in their physician was boosted when their physician queried their spiritual beliefs. In addition, 94% of patients who adhered to spiritual principles demanded that physicians consider their religious beliefs and the framework of their values, and as many as 50% of secular individuals stated that physicians must at least talk to patients with serious conditions about their religious beliefs .
From physicians’ perspectives, knowledge about the spiritual vision of patients helps them understand the disease. Notably, religious beliefs may impact healthcare-related decision-making, which is important for the development of treatment strategies . In addition, evaluating the spiritual vision of patients alleviates their living problems. Therefore, a sound understanding of patients’ spiritual beliefs is inseparable from patient care . Table 1 presents excerpts from some reviewed studies on the relationship between spirituality and health categorized according to mortality, coping and compliance, and recovery.
Types of Yoga for Different Chronic/Acute Conditions
Ayurveda and Yoga are believed to be sister sciences. If followed together, it can result in a maximum impact on your health positively. According to Ayurveda, all our health issues are due to an imbalance between the three elements or Doshas. When these three Doshas, i.e., Vatta, Pitta, and Kapha, are in balance, you are perfectly healthy. But an imbalance or excess of either of them can have many health issues.

Gastric problems result from impaired digestion. And Ayurveda believes this is because of an imbalance in the Vatta Dosha (air element). Vatta Dosha regulates all our digestive organs. Calming our Vatta helps to get rid of gastric issues. Yoga comes to our rescue.

All types of Yoga focus on correcting these three Doshas. There are Yoga Asanas that calm our Vatta Dosha which cures our gastric problems. These yoga asanas benefit us by integrating proper breathing techniques that affect your gastrointestinal organs
Pawanmuktasana, also known as the wind release pose or the gas release pose. 

Pawanmuktasana, as the name suggests, derives itself from two words “Pawan”, meaning wind or gas, and “Mukta”, meaning release or relief. This asana helps by releasing the gas in our stomach. Gas often occurs due to food indigestion. And indigestion causes a lot of problems, more than stomach discomfort like migraine, joint pain, etc.
What are the benefits?
It helps in getting rid of the gas formed due to indigestion
It works on the muscles of the back, biceps, triceps, and hips
How to do it?
First, lie down supine on a mat. Stretch your arms, legs, and take a few breaths. This is the initial pose. The asana is named Savasana
Flex your knees so that your legs make a 90° angle with your thighs
With an exhale, bring your knees close to your chest
Simultaneously raise your head to bring it close to the knees
Hold on to this stance for a few seconds and then release
Keep the breathing normal while you hold the posture.
Balasana means child’s pose, where “Bala” means child, and “asana” means posture. Balasana is often done as end yoga; this yoga focuses on proper breathing techniques. The breathing should be long, thin, slow, and steady. The basic concept is you need to exhale while flexing and inhale while stretching.

What are its benefits?
It relieves fatigue, anxiety, and stress
Improves digestion
It cures back pain
How to do it?
Flex your knees and sit down on your heels in a kneeling position or Vajrasana
Start with an exhale. Stretch out your hands into the air, perpendicularly at the level of your shoulder
Flex at your hips and start bending forward so that your forehead touches the floor
Hold on to this for a few seconds with normal breathing, And retreat to the initial pose with an inhale
Paschimottanasana, also known as the seated forward bend pose, is one of the basic asanas done while sitting. And is one of the basic yoga poses. As the name hints, this asana mainly focuses on the mobility of the hip joint by flexing it.

What are the benefits?
As the body is stretched forward, there is increased pressure on the digestive organs. This Improves digestion and hence benefits gastric-related health issues
It relaxes and calms your whole body. It also reduces stress
Exercises the vertebral column and gives it a proper shape. It also aids people with back pain
It has proved beneficial for patients with diabetes and liver problems
How to do it?
Sit down over a mat, with your legs stretched out
With an inhale, raise your arms above your head so that it points out towards the ceiling
With an exhale. Bend forwards, flexing at your hips from the lower back. So that your hands close to your feet and chest close to your knees
Hold on to this position for a few seconds with normal breathing without lifting the knees or head up and get back to the initial position with an inhale
The word Supta Matsyendrasana has its roots in Sanskrit, where the word “Supta” means to recline, “Matsya” means fish, and “Endra” refers to Lord Indra. Hence, the word “Matsyendrasana” collectively means Lord of the fishes’ pose. This asana is a modified form of Ardha Matsyendrasana, which is done in a sitting position. Supta Matsyendrasa mainly focuses on your spine and abdomen by twisting them. Hence, many people also use the term twisted spine pose to refer to it.

What are the benefits?
Improves the flexibility of the spine and gives it a proper shape
Reduces the incidence of backache
It helps patients with insomnia by relieving body and mind fatigue, and eventually, inducing sleep
Improves digestion and cures gastric problems
It exercises your internal organs
How to do it?
Lie down supine over a mat on your back
Stretch out your shoulder laterally to your sides so that they lie in line with your shoulder
Start with an exhale. Flex your right knee close to your chest. And cross it over your midline so that your right knee touches the floor on your left
Simultaneously, stretch your neck to the opposite side so that your head faces the left
Hold on for a few seconds and get back to the initial pose
Repeat the same with your opposite legs
Inhale, come to the center and exhale, change to the opposite side, and hold with normal breathing
Ananda Balasana is a modified version of Balasana. Also known as the happy baby pose as the name suggests, where “Ananda” means content and “Bala” means baby. Some also refer to it as the dead bug pose, as the asana resembles a happy baby or a dead bug. But the comfortable baby pose is more accepted because of an optimistic approach. Ananda Balasana is often done as warm-up yoga to prepare oneself before doing more intense yoga asanas.

What are the benefits?
Stretches the muscles of hips, thighs (like hamstrings), biceps, triceps
Improves heart rate
Gives a proper shape to your spine and elongates it
Benefits patients with lower back pain
Improves digestion and cures gastric problems
How to do it?
Lie down on your back, supine over a mat
With an exhale, bend your knees close to your chest
Try holding your feet’ thumb with your respective hands
Hold on to this position for a few seconds with normal breathing and let loose
Inhale while setting yourself loose to get back to the initial stance
Halasana is made up of two Sanskrit words, i.e., “Hala”, meaning plough (a farming tool used widely by farmers in India to prepare the soil before sowing seeds), and “asana”, meaning pose. Hence, this is also referred to as the plough pose. Like the plough is used to dig into the deeper layers of the soil, this yoga also lets you delve deeper into your mind and attain peace. This is challenging yoga, and you might take some time to master it. To master this asana, you first need to master your breathing technique and have good flexibility. 

What are the benefits?
Improves flexibility and strengthens muscles of your back, hamstrings, neck, etc
This helps in weight loss
It also benefits our internal organs like the thyroid, pituitary, pancreas, and many others
Improves digestion and cures constipation
Also seen benefiting patients with insomnia, diabetes, cough, cold, asthma, headaches, sinusitis, etc
How to do it?
Lie down on your back, supine over a mat. Keep your palm flat on the ground
With an inhale, press the ground with your palm and raise your legs against gravity
Raise your legs and pull them back so that your toes touch the ground behind your head
Hold on to this position for a few seconds with normal breathing. Make sure the pressure is not coming on the neck
While releasing the pose, press the palms on the ground and slowly roll the back down using the core strength to avoid injuries
Yogas are an organic way of treating your health issues. There are no side effects if you do it properly following professional instructions. But the first thing you should do in case of any health issue is to consult an RMP (Registered Medical Practitioner). Do take your medications regularly and follow your doctor’s instructions. End of the day, spend at least 30 minutes on these measures to heal more effectively and quickly. Stay healthy, Stay safe.
1. For Respiratory Health: Sit up straight in a comfortable posture. Resting both hands on your knees, bring together your thumb and your forefinger in Gyan mudra. Practice deep breathing for a couple of minutes with your eyes closed. Inhale deeply and simultaneously contract your abdominal muscles. Exhale through both nostrils, forcing the air out. Remember to keep your abdominal muscles relaxed while inhaling and ensure there is no effort needed to fill up your lungs and the stomach with air. Let this process occur spontaineously.

After completing 20 rapid breaths this way, stop and resume normal breathing pace. This is one complete round.
Sit straight with your legs crossed, acquiring a comfortable posture. Take a few deep breaths keeping your eyes shut.

Begin with your right hand in Vishnu mudra with an open palm and the index and middle fingers folded down. Place your right thumb on the right nostril and the fourth finger and the pinky on the left.

Closing your right nostril with the thumb inhale through the left nostril on 4 counts and close the left with the fourth finger and the pinky retaining the breath for 4 counts.

Lift your thumb and exhale through the right nostril on 4 counts. Inhale from your right nostril on 4 counts keeping the left nostril closed.

Close your right nostril and retain the breath for a 4 counts seconds, now exhale through the left on 4 counts.

This is one complete round. Continue for 2 minutes. 
Lie flat on your stomach with hands on either side of the chest next to the shoulders. Raising your chest, inhale deeply and aim to stretch your chest and neck bringing your chin up towards the sky.

Maintain this position and do some sessions of deep breathing focusing on expanding your shoulders and chest on each inhale.
Dhanurasana (Bow Pose) Lie face down. Bend your knees holding onto your ankles with your hands. Keep your knees hip-width apart. Breathe in deeply and bring up your chest and thighs till you’re able to grasp your ankles firmly with your hands.Stand upright with your feet placed together, comfortably. Inhale and raise your arms over the head.

Exhale and fold forward, bending at your waist, allowing the arms to hang. Grab the opposite elbow forming a square with the arms.Allow the head and neck to hang and breathe deeply, relaxing in the pose. Release after a few minutes, back to the standing position. Repeat.
 Ardha Matsyendrasana
Sit up with the legs straightened out in front of you. ift your right leg, bending the right knee and move it over your left leg, planting your foot firmly right beside your left knee .

Breathe in deeply and twist bringing your left arm towards your right side to place your hand on the floor right under your right knee and gaze over the right shoulder.

As you inhale, straighten the spine, and on exhaling, twist even further. Repeat on the other side.
 Makrasana
Lie face down on the stomach with legs slightly apart. Making a pillow with the hands, rest the side of the head on the hands.

Adjust the distance of the arms for optimum comfort – if the elbows are too far out, tension will be felt in the neck. If kept too close, they’re likely to strain your lower back.


As you begin to move deeper into the shavasana, focus on bringing the flow of air from the neck to the tailbone and feel the breath moving along your spine to activate energy channels. Repeat.
Surya Namaskar: Stand straight and assume into the namaskara position in front of your chest(Surya Namaskar). Raise your arms above your head, pushing pelvis slightly forward(Surya Namaskar). Move your upper body slightly forward, bending your waist and bringing your hands down to the floor(Surya Namaskar). Step back with your right foot, stretching your leg and thigh muscles as much as you can tolerate. While doing this, your left leg should be bent with your knee planted on the floor right beside your left arm and both palms placed on either side of left foot. (Surya Namaskar)

Aim to force down the entire body weight on your palms and toes. Slightly bring your knees down towards the ground with your torso still lifted. 


Raise your chest,shoulders and chin, bending your head backwards to look up at the sky. Lift your legs and back to form an upside down V shape with your body. 

Now, bring your right foot forward between both palms. Let left foot down on the floor. Stretch your neck upwards.

Raise your arms and stand back up. Bend a little backward, pushing pelvis forward. Lower arms to your side and relax. 

Shavasana (Corpse Pose): Lie down on your back with your legs apart. Rest your hands on the floor, palms facing upwards and fingers left relaxed on either sides just a little away from your body.

Close both your eyes and track your breathing while you relax. Breathe deeply and slowly. Hold this position for 10 minutes.

To derive full benefits for sound respiratory health, people are advised to consume hot water with turmeric, honey, and ginger to boost lung health in addition to these yoga exercises. Steam therapy turns out to be quite useful in cases of congestion or persistent respiratory disorders.
Different Yoga Astras for Cardiac Issues: Tadasana – Mountain Pose- Lay down a yoga mat on an even surface and stand on top of it, keeping your posture erect.
Keep your feet together and gradually bring both of your palms together; interlock them.
As you inhale, stretch your interlocked arms to the top of your head, pushing your palms facing upwards.
Exhale and look up and stretch your neck muscles while dropping your head back on the shoulders.
Hold this position for 10 seconds.
Utkatasana or The Chair Pose: You have to start this yoga asana from the Tadasana we discussed in the last pointer.
From there, you need to simultaneously fold your knees forward as you move your hips back, mimicking the squat position.
As you are in the “chair position”, raise both of your arms in the air.
You need to touch your ears with the inside of your arms and also ensure that your shoulders aren’t taut.
Stay in this position for 10 seconds and stretch your body upwards.
As you practice breathing, release your hands and gradually return to the initial position.
Uttanasana or the Standing Forward Bend: Start by standing in a straight posture, keeping your hands on either side of your body.
As you relax, inhale deeply and bend down forward from the hips exhaling as you do so.
Once you have bent your upper body, place your arms on either side of your foot. If possible, you can also interlock your arms and place them on the back of the ankle.
Focus on stretching and lifting your tailbone while keeping your body bent from the waist down.
Stay in this position for 5-10 seconds and then return to the original position gradually.
Vrikshasana or the Tree Pose: Vrikshasana is a balancing posture, so that’s something you have to master as you practice more of this yoga asanas for a healthy heart.
Start with an erect posture, keeping your arms on either side of your body.
From there, you have to bend and fold your right knee and lift the folded leg towards the inner side of your thigh.
You need to place the underside of your foot on the inside of your inner thigh and maintain your balance while standing on one leg.
Raise your arms from the side of your body and join them over your head to form Namaste.
As you do this, practice deep breathing as you inhale and exhale.
As you exhale, bring your hands down and put your right foot on the ground and return to the initial position.
You can then change to the left leg and repeat this asana 5-10 times.
Padangusthasana or the Big Toe Pose: A lot similar to Uttanasana, you have to start with an erect posture, standing on top of a yoga mat.
Place your hands on the hips and inhale deeply as you stand straight.
Suck in your belly and relax your head, neck, and shoulder.
Bend and fold your body from the waist and place your palms on either side of your foot on the ground.
If your hamstrings are too stiff and you are feeling pain, fold your knees slightly to relieve that tautness.
Hold this position for 10 seconds and return to the initial position as you exhale.
Chakrasana or the Wheel Pose: Amidst all the different best yoga asanas for heart patients, Chakrasana is the most difficult to master. You need to do it under the guidance of a trained professional.
Start by laying down a thick yoga mat on an even surface and lying down on it.
Bend your knees, keeping your feet planted flat on the ground. Press down firmly on the ground with your feet.
Take your hands and place your hands right by your shoulders in a way so that the fingers are pointing towards the shoulders.
As you put pressure on your hands and feet, lift your upper body off the ground.
Simultaneously, place the crown of your head on the yoga mat for support.
As you press into your inner thighs, feet, and pelvis, exert maximum pressure and lift your body to form a curved wheel structure, lifting your head along with your abdomen as well.
 Sarvangasana or the Shoulder Stand: Like Chakrasana, we’d recommend you do this yoga asana with a professional by your side. It takes a little time to master, so until you do, it is better to have someone support your posture.
Start by lying down on top of a thick yoga mat, keeping your arms on either side of your body.
As you prepare yourself for the asana, lift your legs, buttocks, and hip simultaneously in one swift motion. You have to lift it high enough so your legs are pointing toward the ceiling.
For support, take your palms and place them on your lower back, keeping your elbows flat on the ground.
You might experience a wobbly posture initially, so have someone hold your legs in a stable position and stay in that position for 5-10 seconds.
As you exhale, bring your legs, hip, and buttocks down on the yoga mat and relax your body.
Yoga Astras for Stress Related Issues:
Yoga encourages mental and physical relaxation, which helps reduce stress and anxiety. The physical postures promote flexibility, relieve tension, and alleviate pain.

Yoga poses may help you release physical blockages like muscle knots, helping release emotions and tension. They also promote the release of mood-boosting endorphins, which are the feel-good hormones that can positively affect how you handle stress.

Focusing on the present moment during your yoga practice enhances your awareness, boosts your concentration, and centers your mind.

As you become aware of the transitory nature of your bodily sensations, thoughts, and feelings, you may find it easier to let go of attachments to positive, negative, and neutral experiences. You may also learn to cultivate feelings such as love, joy, and serenity.
Cat-Cow Pose (Marjaryasana to Bitilasana): Begin in a tabletop position.
Place your wrists underneath your shoulders and your knees underneath your hips.
As you inhale, turn your gaze toward the ceiling and allow your belly to move toward your mat, arching your back. This is Cow Pose.
As you exhale, draw your chin in toward your chest and bend your spine toward the ceiling, like a cat.
Continue to flow between these two positions for 1 minute.
Child’s Pose (Balasana)
Child’s pose helps create an inward focus and restore energy. It also supports mental and physical relaxation.

For more support, place a cushion under your forehead, torso, or thighs.

From a kneeling position, place your knees together or slightly apart.
Sit back on your heels.
Hinge at your hips as you fold forward, resting your forehead on your mat.
Extend your arms in front of you or alongside your legs.
Allow your torso to sink into your thighs.
Breathe deeply and focus on relaxing your body.
Hold this pose for up to 5 minutes.
Legs-Up-the-Wall Pose (Viparita Karani)
Legs-Up-the-Wall Pose provides deep relaxation while boosting lymph flow and circulation.

Sit on the floor facing the wall, with your body as close to the wall as possible.
Lie on your back and place your legs up the wall with straight knees.
Position your hips next to the wall or a few inches away.
Place your arms alongside your body, or place one hand on your belly and one hand on your chest.
Hold this pose for up to 15 minutes.

Corpse Pose (Savasana)
During this pose, focus on breathing deeply as you calm your mind and let go of tension.

Lie flat on your back with your feet slightly wider than your hips.
Allow your toes to splay out to the sides.
Position your arms next to your body at a 45-degree angle.
Align your head, neck, and shoulders with your spine.
Breathe deeply as you allow your body to fully relax.
Stay in this pose for 10–20 minutes
Release negativity during your yoga practice
Negative thoughts are bound to arise when you do yoga. You can practice awareness, acceptance, and detachment to create positive mental patterns. This may help you have fewer negative thoughts and be less affected by them.

Learn to focus on the present moment and bring your attention to your thoughts as they arise and pass, which helps you recognize their fleeting nature.

Each time you find yourself getting lost in your thoughts — whether they’re positive or negative — bring your awareness back to your breath and body. Over time, you can make it a habit to detach from both positive and negative states of mind.
Employ stress relief techniques off the mat
To manage stress off the mat, take a look at your schedule and lifestyle to see where you can make changes. This may include allowing yourself more free time, developing a healthy eating plan, or spending more time in nature.

While yoga can provide tremendous benefits, it’s important to remember that you will still experience the ups and downs of life. It’s natural to experience a wide range of feelings and emotions.

If you find your yoga practice creates more stress in your life, talk to an instructor who can help you develop a routine tailored to your needs. And, as always, talk to your doctor before starting any yoga routine, especially if you have any health conditions or take medications.




